Adapt platform API access to CAPI (#2229)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/getting-started/access-to-platform-api/_index.md

title: Access to the platform API
description: How engineers can access the platform API to provision new workload clusters or deploy applications.
weight: 30

> last_review_date: 2024-06-11

Author: ```suggestion
last_review_date: 2024-07-17
```

  - How can I access the platform API?
  - What do I need to do to access the platform API?
---

> Giant Swarm's platform API, a Kubernetes API that operates on the management cluster, offers unique features and custom resources. These enable you to perform a range of actions, from creating and updating clusters to deploying applications, enhancing your cluster and workload resource management capabilities.

Author: > And should we be very clear and say ", the Kubernetes API of the management cluster,"? So that customers don't accidentally think that our API is something homegrown and separate.

I think the first phrase states that

> You can have multiple management clusters, for example, if different cloud providers are used. Each management cluster has its own API endpoint and is isolated from the others. In this guide, you learn how to access the platform API of one of these management clusters.

Author: I am not so sure. Now, we have smaller customers, but usually, the typical scenario is having more than one region. I would like to read that if I were a new engineer at a customer company.

To interact with the platform API, you have three options:

1. Use GitOps flavour using Flux
2. Use the `kubectl` command-line tool with our custom plugin

> 3. Use the [Giant Swarm Web UI](https://docs.giantswarm.io/ui-api/)

Author: I would still mention other ways to access the platform, although we don't list them.

> To interact with the platform API, you have three options:
> 
> 1. Use GitOps flavour using Flux
> 2. Use the `kubectl` command-line tool with our custom plugin
> 3. Use the [Giant Swarm Web UI](https://docs.giantswarm.io/ui-api/)
> 
> This guide focuses on the second option, using the `kubectl` command-line tool. However, you can find more information about the other options in the [tutorials](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/).

Author: ```suggestion
Usually, to interact with the platform API, you have three options:

1. Use GitOps flavour using Flux
2. Use the `kubectl` command-line tool with our custom plugin
3. Use the [Giant Swarm Web UI](https://docs.giantswarm.io/ui-api/)

This guide focuses on the second option, using the `kubectl` command-line tool. However, you can find more information about the other options in the [tutorials](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/).
```

1. Install [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl)
2. Install [krew](https://krew.sigs.k8s.io/)
3. Install `kubectl-gs` by running: `kubectl krew install gs`

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab title="macOS (Homebrew)">}}

```sh
brew install kubernetes-cli krew
kubectl krew install gs
```

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Step 1: Log in to the platform API

A special command to log in to the platform API is `kubectl gs login`. You need to provide the address of the management cluster's API endpoint, which is usually provided by Giant Swarm.

```text
$ kubectl gs login "https://api.<management cluster base domain>/"
[...]
A new kubectl context named 'gs-wombat' has been created and selected. To switch back to this context later, use either of these commands:
 kubectl gs login wombat
 kubectl config use-context gs-wombat
```

When logging in, you must authenticate in your browser using the configured identity provider (for example, by signing into an Active Directory or GitHub user account). To learn more about the different authentication methods, see the [authentication page]({{< relref "/overview/architecture/authentication" >}}).

## Step 2: Explore the platform

> Let's run some commands and understand what's happening under the hood.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's look at what type of resources and operations platform engineers usually perform against the API. 
```

The first command we suggest running is `kubectl get orgs`, which lists the organizations defined in your management cluster.

```text
$ kubectl get orgs
NAME                    AGE
production              97d
testing                 97d
giantswarm              97d
```

Organizations are a way to separate and isolate clusters, apps, etc., between different teams or environments. More information can be found in [multi-tenancy page]({{< relref "/vintage/platform-overview/multi-tenancy" >}}).

Secondly, run the `kubectl gs get clusters -A` command, which shows all the clusters managed by your management cluster, the `-A` flag stands for all namespaces.

```text

> $ kubectl gs get clusters -A

Reviewer: Updated 👍

NAMESPACE          NAME    AGE    CONDITION   SERVICE PRIORITY  RELEASE   ORGANIZATION  DESCRIPTION
org-testing        rfjh2   84d    UPDATED     lowest            25.1.0    testing       Testing cluster
org-production     jn88t   91d    CREATED     highest           25.0.1    production    Production cluster
```

You may notice some important points:

1. A cluster belonging to an organization called `x` will be represented in the Kubernetes namespace `org-x` in the management cluster (that's why we use the `-A` flag to see all the namespaces)

> 2. Organizations may not have any clusters attached to them (yet)

Reviewer: Did we mean, that org can exists without having clusters on it?

> 2. Organizations may not have any clusters attached to them (yet)

Reviewer 2: Don't know what is _meant_ here, but the sentence ambiguously _sounds_ like "You can't attach clusters to organizations".

> 2. Organizations may not have any clusters attached to them (yet)

Author: ```suggestion
2. Organizations may not have any clusters running on their namespace (yet)
```

> 3. There is a `giantswarm` organization in which we define the current management cluster and its configuration. Customers aren't supported to make changes in here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. There is a `giantswarm` organization in which we define the current management cluster and its configuration. Customers should not make changes in here.
```

(or "supposed")

On the other hand, you can see the YAML definition of a cluster (in this example, cluster `rfjh2` in organization `testing`) by running:

```sh
kubectl gs get cluster rfjh2 -n org-testing -o yaml
```

Finally, you can see the apps deployed in a cluster by running:

```sh
$ kubectl gs get app -n org-giantswarm
NAME                     VERSION     LAST DEPLOYED     STATUS
golem-capa-karpenter      0.3.0          50d          deployed
golem-capi-node-labeler   0.5.0          54d          deployed
golem-cert-exporter       2.8.5          54d          deployed
golem-cert-manager        3.7.2          39d          deployed

> ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[...]
```

(not to self: reviewed until here)

  - How can I access the platform API?
  - What do I need to do to access the platform API?
---

Giant Swarm's platform API, a Kubernetes API that operates on the management cluster, offers unique features and custom resources. These enable you to perform a range of actions, from creating and updating clusters to deploying applications, enhancing your cluster and workload resource management capabilities.

You can have multiple management clusters, for example, if different cloud providers are used. Each management cluster has its own API endpoint and is isolated from the others. In this guide, you learn how to access the platform API of one of these management clusters.

To interact with the platform API, you have three options:

1. Use GitOps flavour using Flux
2. Use the `kubectl` command-line tool with our custom plugin
3. Use the [Giant Swarm Web UI](https://docs.giantswarm.io/ui-api/)

> This guide focuses on the second option, using the `kubectl` command-line tool. However, you can find more information about the other options in the [tutorials](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/).

Author: Here I would like to put specific doc entries instead of this link

## Step 1: Install the necessary tools

Select your operating system:

{{< tabs >}}
{{< tab title="Any">}}

1. Install [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl)
2. Install [krew](https://krew.sigs.k8s.io/)
3. Install `kubectl-gs` by running: `kubectl krew install gs`

{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab title="macOS (Homebrew)">}}

```sh
brew install kubernetes-cli krew
kubectl krew install gs
```

{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Step 2: Log in to the platform API

A special command to log in to the platform API is `kubectl gs login`. You need to provide the address of the management cluster's API endpoint, which is usually provided by Giant Swarm.

```text

> $ kubectl gs login "https://api.<management cluster domain>/"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ kubectl gs login "https://api.<management cluster base domain>/"
```

ip-10-0-227-255.eu-west-2.compute.internal   Ready    control-plane,master   47d     v1.25.16
ip-10-0-69-91.eu-west-2.compute.internal     Ready    worker                 21h     v1.25.16
ip-10-0-82-78.eu-west-2.compute.internal     Ready    worker                 13h     v1.25.16
ip-10-0-97-66.eu-west-2.compute.internal     Ready    worker                 19m     v1.25.16
```

There are two roles: `control-plane` and `worker`. Note that this still relates to the management cluster. None of your business applications should ever run on the management cluster's nodes, unless you want to run custom operators.

The second command we suggest running is `kubectl get orgs`, which lists the organizations defined in your management cluster.

```text
$ kubectl get orgs
NAME                    AGE
production              97d
testing                 97d
giantswarm              97d
```

Organizations are a way to separate and isolate clusters, apps, etc., between different teams or environments. More information can be found in [multi-tenancy page]({{< relref "/vintage/platform-overview/multi-tenancy" >}}).

> Finally, run the `kubectl gs get clusters -A` command, which shows all the clusters managed by your management cluster—the `-A` flag stands for all namespaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, run the `kubectl gs get clusters -A` command, which shows all the clusters managed by your management cluster, the `-A` flag stands for all namespaces.
```

```text
$ kubectl gs get clusters -A

> NAMESPACE          NAME    AGE    CONDITION   SERVICE PRIORITY  RELEASE   ORGANIZATION  DESCRIPTION

Reviewer: Isn't this vintage output?

org-testing        rfjh2   84d    UPDATED     lowest            25.1.0    testing       Testing cluster
org-production     jn88t   91d    CREATED     highest           25.0.1    production    Production cluster
```

You may notice some important points:

1. A cluster belonging to an organization called `x` will be represented in the Kubernetes namespace `org-x` in the management cluster (that's why we use the `-A` flag to see all the namespaces)
2. Organizations may not have any clusters attached to them (yet)
3. There is a `giantswarm` organization in which we define the management cluster and its configuration. Customers aren't supported to make changes in here.

Finally, you can see the YAML definition of a cluster (in this example, cluster `rfjh2` in organization `testing`) by running:

```sh

> kubectl get cluster rfjh2 -n org-testing -o yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubectl gs get cluster rfjh2 -n org-testing -o yaml
```
